JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a look at
how artists captured Detroit's
turbulent history in the
civil rights era.
This week marks the 50th
anniversary of major
civil unrest in the
Motor City, and a unique
series of exhibitions are
chronicling that moment.
Jeffrey Brown went to
Michigan to see them.
JEFFREY BROWN: A fiery red sky,
people trapped in a burning
city, charred remains from the
1967 Detroit riots, a painting
by Yvonne Parks Catchings in an
exhibition titled Say It Loud:
Art, History, Rebellion, at
the Charles H. Wright Museum
of African-American History.
Striking images of
confrontation, and consequences,
in works by national
and local artists from
the 1960s on.
Curator Patrina Chatman:
PATRINA CHATMAN, Curator,
Charles H. Wright Museum
of African-American
History: You see
the emotions of the
artists, describing history
from their perspective.
I see the politics.
I see the social concerns
that people had in it.
I see their pain.
I see and I feel their
pain, and I think other
people will feel it as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: July, 1967,
five days of violence,
fear and destruction in
a major American city
that would leave 43 dead, some
7,200 arrested, and more than
2,000 buildings destroyed.
Fifty years later, some
of the city's leading
cultural institutions
are asking questions:
Was it a riot?
A rebellion?
Even a revolution?
And using art to
look back and ahead.
At the Detroit Historical
Museum, which, for
the record, has been a
funder of the "NewsHour"
and which spearheaded
the citywide effort, old
TVs play news footage.
A replica of a National Guard
tank has been turned into an
audiovisual experience, with
oral histories
told by Detroiters.
The Detroit Institute of Art
weighs in with an exhibition
titled Art of Rebellion: Black
Art of the Civil Rights Movement
with works by individuals,
including leading figures
such as Romare Bearden and
Sam Gilliam, and so-called
collectives formed in the 1960s
and after by artists seeking
a greater voice in society.
VALERIE MERCER, Curator,
Detroit Institute of Art: The
civil rights movement and the
black power movement
emboldened a lot of the
African-American artists.
Most of the mainstream
art museums didn't
provide many opportunities
to African-American
artists during
the '60s and '70s.
They were also very
uncomfortable dealing
with racial, social
and political issues,
so they avoided that work.
Now things are
changing, fortunately.
JEFFREY BROWN: Several local
artists attended the opening,
including Allie McGhee, who told
me of his encounters with the
National Guard 50 years ago.
ALLIE MCGHEE, Artist: I had
people drive up because I was
out past curfew, and have a
young man who's like 17 or
18 scared to death, stick
a bayonet in your ribcage.
You don't forget
stuff like this.
JEFFREY BROWN: For this
exhibition, McGhee contributed a
painting from 1968 titled Black
Attack, and a later abstract
work titled Apartheid.
Since then, his art has gone
well beyond such subjects.
It just took him a while to
get past what he'd witnessed.
ALLIE MCGHEE: It
wasn't something you
could walk away from.
And for me, it sort of like
was a dominant subject matter
for maybe 15 or 20 years.
JEFFREY BROWN: You couldn't
get it out of your head
or your mind or your work?
ALLIE MCGHEE: No, you can't.
Yes, the subtleties
of it kept recurring.
I had to work that out of
my painting experience.
It's not good to be angry.
It lowers the
intellectual level.
You don't accomplish a lot.
You're blinded by it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Rita Dickerson's
painting commemorates the terror
and killings of three black men
at the Algiers Hotel,
one of the most harrowing
episodes of those July days.
But she also adds the names
of young black men and women
killed in police shootings more
recently.
Dickerson grew up on
Detroit's East Side.
RITA DICKERSON, Artist:
We had two bakeries.
We had a hardware
store, two pharmacies.
Everything was there
within one block, and we
could walk every place.
And during the riot,
all that burned down.
And 50 years later,
it has not returned.
It's still desolate.
And it breaks my
heart, breaks my heart.
JEFFREY BROWN: In so many
of Detroit's neighborhoods,
on so many blocks, the
abandoned homes and
empty lots remain.
But there are signs of
life in Detroit today.
The youngest artist in the
exhibition, 29-year-old
Mario Moore, is literally
a product of the
museum.
His parents met here.
MARIO MOORE, Artist: So, it's
my grandmother holding images
of her living sons, right,
and the sense of protection,
like, these are mine, you
can't have them, right?
JEFFREY BROWN: His
grandmother, Helen Moore,
is a longtime Detroit
activist, and the subject
of Mario's work here.
It addresses violence
and how it's portrayed.
MARIO MOORE: As soon as you
turn on the news, what tends to
happen is they show the mourning
black mother, right, the mother
that's crying about the recent
death of her son, her husband,
her daughter.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's
the narrative, the story.
MARIO MOORE: That's
the narrative you get.
And I feel like it was something
that began out of a way to
kind of find compassion for
the other, right?
But once that gets used over
and over and over and over
again, it loses its value.
Nobody really cares anymore.
And, for me, the women
in my family have a very
different perspective.
I feel like they're
very protective,
they're very powerful.
JEFFREY BROWN: Different
perspectives on Detroit's
past and future, through
exhibitions around
the city over the coming months.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown in Detroit.